h1. How I created a vagrant base box for Elexis

My needs were:

* i386. In the past there were problems running Elexis on a 64 bit machine.
** Jubula needs a 32-bit Java
* SUN-Java-6
* Debian squeeze
* Swiss german keyboard & localization

The following links got me up and working using the great "veewee":https://github.com/jedi4ever/veewee project. Thanks!
* http://seletz.github.com/blog/2012/01/17/creating-vagrant-base-boxes-with-veewee/
* http://www.whitewashing.de/2012/05/31/virtual_machines_with_vagrant__veewee_and_puppet.html

h2. Steps to create a new box

@vagrant basebox define 'Elexis-Squeeze-i386' 'Debian-6.0.5-i386-netboot'@ copied the contents of templates/Debian-6.0.5-i386-netboot
into definitions/Elexis-Squeeze-i386

Then I changed a few things in
* definitions/Elexis-Squeeze-i386/definition.rb
* definitions/Elexis-Squeeze-i386/base.sh
* definitions/Elexis-Squeeze-i386/preseed.cfg

Building was done using the following steps
* @vagrant basebox build 'Elexis-Squeeze-i386'@ took a few minutes to finish
* @vagrant basebox validate 'Elexis-Squeeze-i386'@ confirmed in a few seconds that my new box was ready to be used by vagrant
* @vagrant basebox export 'Elexis-Squeeze-i386'@ create @Elexis-Squeeze-i386.box@ (about 300 MB)
* @vagrant box add 'Elexis-Squeeze-i386'@ 'Elexis-Squeeze-i386.box' makes this box available to be used by vagrant. The output into ~/.vagrant.d/boxes/Elexis-Squeeze-i386/

h3. Want to try it?

Then call (in the top level directory of elexis-vagrant)

bc..
git clone https://github.com/jedi4ever/veewee
cd vewee
sudo apt-get install virtualbox-ose ruby
gem install vagrant bundler
bundle install
ln -s ../definitions/Elexis-Squeeze-i386 definitions
# Change the definitions to you liking
vagrant basebox build 'Elexis-Squeeze-i386'
vagrant basebox validate 'Elexis-Squeeze-i386'
vagrant basebox export 'Elexis-Squeeze-i386'
vagrant box add 'Elexis-Squeeze-i386' 

Watch out for:
* preseed.cfg defines a mirror for apt, using @d-i mirror/http/proxy string http://172.25.1.61:3142/@. Adapt it to you needs before calling @vagrant basebox build@
* if you want to install a apt-proxy-cache I recommend @sudo apt-get install apt-cacher-ng@

Niklaus Giger, 7 July 2012

